#summary Describes how to annotate fields with referenced objects.

= Referencing Objects =

Mongo references are references from one document (object) to another within the database. Consider the following classes:

{{{
public class BlogEntry {

    private String title;
    private Date publishDate;
    private String body;

    private Author author;

    // getters and setters
}

...

public class Author {

    private String username;
    private String fullName;
    private String emailAddress;

    // getters and setters
}
}}}

The question here is: _How do we annotate the author field in BlogEntry?_ We could of course use the @MongoEmbedded annotation, but that does not make sense here, since we don't want to store the Author with every BlogEntry instance. Instead we want multiple blog entries to reference a single Author document in Mongo.

For this case we use the @MongoReference annotation:

{{{
...
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoCollectionName;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoEmbedded;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoID;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoReference;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoValue;
...

public class BlogEntry {

    @MongoID
    private String id;
    @MongoCollectionName
    private String collectionName;

    @MongoValue
    private String title;
    @MongoValue
    private Date publishDate;
    @MongoValue
    private String body;

    @MongoReference
    private Author author;

    // getters and setters
}

...

public class Author {

    @MongoID
    private String id;
    @MongoCollectionName
    private String collectionName;

    @MongoValue
    private String username;
    @MongoValue
    private String fullName;
    @MongoValue
    private String emailAddress;

    // getters and setters
}
}}}

One very important thing to mention when working with references: _The referenced object must have been saved in Mongo before saving the object referencing it._

This makes sense, really. In terms of the example above, it means that you must already have an Author in the database before you can create a BlogEntry.

Morphia can also store a java.util.List of embedded objects, as long as the List is parameterized with the referenced class type.

{{{
    @MongoReference
    private List<Author> authors;
}}}

By default, Morphia uses the field name as the value name in Mongo. This can be overridden by specifying a name on the @MongoReference annotation:

{{{
    @MongoReference(name = "blog_authors")
    private List<Author> authors;
}}}

Finally, when annotating a parameterized java.util.List of referenced objects, Morphia will by default use java.util.ArrayList?. If you need another implementation, you can override this by specifying listClass on the @MongoReference annotation:

{{{
    @MongoReference(listClass = java.util.Vector.class)
    private List<Author> authors;
}}}