#summary Describes how to annotate fields with embedded objects.

= Embedding Objects =

We're often dealing with an object structure that does not just have a flat list of fields, but rather a tree of objects. For example, look at the following classes:

{{{
public class Hotel {

    private String name;
    private int stars;
    private Address address;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

where the Address class looks like this:

{{{
public class Address {

    private String street;
    private String city;
    private String postCode;
    private String country;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

The question is, how do we annotate the following field in Hotel:

{{{
    private Address address;
}}}

This is where the @MongoEmbedded annotation comes into play.

As a rule of thumb, you should @MongoEmbedded for objects that are dependent on the parent object (and therefore have no life outside it), and are not shared between objects. If you need to reference another collection object, look at @MongoReference instead.

We just annotate the above classes with @MongoValue and @MongoEmbedded:

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoCollectionName;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoEmbedded;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoID;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoValue;

public class Hotel {

    @MongoID
    private String id;
    @MongoCollectionName
    private String collectionName;

    @MongoValue
    private String name;
    @MongoValue
    private int stars;
    @MongoEmbedded
    private Address address;

    // ... getters and setters
}

...

import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoValue;

public class Address {

    @MongoValue
    private String street;
    @MongoValue
    private String city;
    @MongoValue
    private String postCode;
    @MongoValue
    private String country;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

As you can see here, _classes used solely as embedded objects do not need the @MongoID and @MongoCollectionName annotations_.

Just as with the primitive types, Morphia can also store a java.util.List of embedded objects, as long as the List is parameterized with the embedded class type.

{{{
    @MongoEmbedded
    private List<Comment> comments;
}}}

By default, Morphia uses the field name as the value name in Mongo. This can be overridden by specifying a name on the @MongoEmbedded annotation:

{{{
    @MongoEmbedded(name = "blog_comments")
    private List<Comment> comments;
}}}

Finally, when annotating a parameterized java.util.List of embedded objects, Morphia will by default use java.util.ArrayList?. If you need another implementation, you can override this by specifying listClass on the @MongoEmbedded annotation:

{{{
    @MongoEmbedded(listClass = java.util.Vector.class)
    private List<Comment> comments;
}}}