#summary A quick 2 minute intro to Morphia.

= So you want to store your POJOs in MongoDB? =

Morphia makes that very easy. Here's what you need to do.

== Annotate your Java classes ==

Let's imagine we have the following simple classes:

{{{
public class Hotel {

    private String name;
    private int stars;
    private Address address;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

and

{{{
public class Address {

    private String street;
    private String city;
    private String postCode;
    private String country;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

We want to save instances of these objects to MongoDB. All we need to do is add the Morphia annotations to the class fields we want to persist:

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoCollectionName;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoDocument;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoEmbedded;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoID;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoValue;

@MongoDocument
public class Hotel {

    @MongoID
    private String id;
    @MongoCollectionName
    private String collectionName;

    private String name;
    private int stars;

    @MongoEmbedded
    private Address address;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

and

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoEmbedded;

@MongoEmbedded
public class Address {

    private String street;
    private String city;
    private String postCode;
    private String country;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

We've annotated Hotel as @MongoDocument, and Address as @MongoEmbedded since the Address is an object dependent on Hotel (and does not have a life outside the Hotel).

You can see that all the basic fields are automatically mapped by Morphia. If you want to exclude a field, just annotate it with @MongoTransient.

Also note that we had to add two new fields (id and collectionName) to our Hotel class. Morphia provides an abstract class that has these fields. Using that class, the Hotel class becomes even simpler:

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.AbstractMongoEntity;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoDocument;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoEmbedded;
import com.google.code.morphia.annotations.MongoValue;

@MongoDocument
public class Hotel extends AbstractMongoEntity {

    private String name;
    private int stars;

    @MongoEmbedded
    private Address address;

    // ... getters and setters
}
}}}

== Create a Morphia instance and add the classes ==

Next, we create an instance of Morphia, and map the classes we have annotated:

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.Morphia;
...
Morphia morphia = new Morphia();
morphia.map(Hotel.class).map(Address.class);
...
}}}

== Map to/from MongoDB objects ==

Now we can use the Morphia instance to map our classes to/from MongoDB objects. To save a Hotel in Mongo:

{{{
Hotel hotel = new Hotel();
hotel.setName("My Hotel");
hotel.setStars(4);

Address address = new Address();
address.setStreet("123 Some street");
address.setCity("Some city");
address.setPostCode("123 456");
address.setCountry("Some country");

Mongo mongo = ...;
Morphia morphia = ...;
DB db = mongo.getDB("morphia_test");

// map the hotel to a Mongo DBObject
DBObject hotelDbObj = morphia.toDBObject(hotel);

// and then save that DBObject in a Mongo collection
db.getCollection("hotels").save(hotelDbObj);
}}}

Loading a Hotel from Mongo is also simple:

{{{
Mongo mongo = ...;
Morphia morphia = ...;
DB db = mongo.getDB("morphia_test");

String hotelId = ...; // the ID of the hotel we want to load

// load the DBObject from a Mongo collection
BasicDBObject hotelDbObj = (BasicDBObject) db.getCollection("hotels").findOne(new BasicDBObject("_id", new ObjectId(hotelId)));

// and then map it to our Hotel object
Hotel hotel = morphia.fromDBObject(Hotel.class, hotelDbObj);
}}}

== Data Access Object (DAO) Support ==

Take advantage of the Morphia DAO support:

{{{
import com.google.code.morphia.Morphia;
import com.google.code.morphia.dao.AbstractMongoDAO;
import com.mongodb.DBCollection;
import com.mongodb.Mongo;

public class HotelDAO extends AbstractMongoDAO<Hotel> {

    private final Mongo mongo;

    public HotelDAO( Morphia morphia, Mongo mongo ) {
        super(Hotel.class, morphia);
        this.mongo = mongo;
    }

    @Override
    protected DBCollection collection() {
        return mongo.getDB("morphia_test").getCollection("hotels");
    }
}
}}}

Creating a DAO object abstracts all the mapping, and the direct use of Morphia. This gives us a much cleaner approach:

{{{
Mongo mongo = ...;
Morphia morphia = ...;

HotelDAO hotelDAO = new HotelDAO(morphia, mongo);

Hotel hotel = ...;
hotelDAO.save(hotel);

String someHotelId = ...;
Hotel someHotelId = hotelDAO.get(someHotelId); 
}}}

As we can see, the AbstractMongoDAO (that our HotelDAO extends) has lots of methods already implemented for us.

In a web application environment, we would probably inject the Mongo and Morphia instances into the DAO, and then inject the DAO into a controller, so the controller would never directly deal with Mongo or Morphia.